
VZCZCXYZ0002
PP RUEHWEB
DE RUEHBO #1232/01 0522331
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 212331Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2866
INFO RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 8714
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ FEB LIMA 4783
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA 9998
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 5429
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC//USDP ADMIN/CHAIRS//
CONFIDENTIAL BOGOTA 001232 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER MARR CO
SUBJECT: A/S SHANNON MEETS WITH DEFENSE MINISTER SANTOS ON 
JANUARY 30 
 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor John S. Creamer 
Reasons: 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Defense Minister Juan Manuel Santos told WHA A/S 
Thomas Shannon and INL A/S Anne Patterson the U.S. and 
Colombia should develop a coordinated message on Plan 
Colombia's successes, a message he would take with him to 
Washington when he met with Secretary of Defense Gates. 
Santos urged the U.S. and UN to develop a common approach to 
measure hectares under coca cultivation, saying the Colombian 
and international publics were confused by different 
methodologies that produced sharply varying results.  Santos 
said three key programs -- spraying, development aid, and 
military assistance -- should be integrated more closely in 
planning and executing programs and operations.  On 
nationalization, all agreed it would be helpful for the GOC 
to show it was already preparing to assume key costs.  Santos 
welcomed news of approval for a fourth spray package.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) On January 30, WHA A/S Shannon and INL A/S Patterson 
met with Defense Minister Santos.  Shannon and Patterson were 
accompanied by Ambassador William B. Wood, Deputy Assistant 
Attorney General Mary Lee Warren, USAID Deputy Assistant 
Administrator Mark Silverman, Deputy Assistant Secretary of 
Defense Steve Johnson, ONDCP Deputy Director James O'Gara, 
INL Office Director for the Americas Tony Arias, WHA/AND 
Director Phil French, Political Counselor John Creamer, 
Defense Attache Rey Velez, and pol/mil officer (notetaker). 
Santos was accompanied by Vice Ministers of Defense Juan 
Carlos Pinzon and Sergio Jaramillo, Military Forces Commander 
General Freddy Padilla, Ambassador to the U.S. Carolina 
Barco, Colombian DCM Mariana Pacheco, and U.S. Office 
Director Patricia Cortes. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Communicating Plan Colombia Achievements 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C)  Santos opened the meeting by saying the U.S. and 
Colombia faced a common challenge in highlighting Plan 
Colombia's successes.  He stressed the need for a coordinated 
message, which he would use in upcoming meetings with 
Congressional staffers.  Plan Colombia was beyond the halfway point to success; it was key that the U.S. continue to 
provide the assistance needed to finish the job.  Plan 
Colombia's fundamental goal was to strengthen Colombian 
democracy; the recent revelations of paramilitary-political 
ties from the Justice and Peace process proved that it was 
working.  A/S Patterson was pleased with a pocket-sized 
booklet and laminated charts noting achievements of the GOC's 
Democratic Security program and suggested the GOC share them 
with Congress.  Despite a difficult climate in Congress, 
Shannon said Colombia had a good story to tell, with 
substantial progress made in a short time. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Common Measures for a Clearer Message 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C)  Santos said different drug cultivation measurements 
used by the U.S. and UN caused confusion, especially since 
changes to the U.S. methodology had resulted in upward 
revisions of the estimated hectares of coca cultivation.  To 
the public, an "overnight" change in the number of coca 
hectares from 80,000 to 144,000 looked like failure.  What 
was needed was a common basis which could be calculated 
retroactively to provide a clear comparison.  Ambassador Wood 
agreed with Santos' frustration, saying the U.S. and Colombia 
were winning the war but lacked the numbers to show it.  Wood 
explained the former U.S. measure was inadequate and required 
improvement; hence the changes in last year's approach.  The 
best way forward was to freeze the method now to allow 
comparability in the future.  Santos argued that what was 
needed was a simple and clear metric -- a harmonized number 
that could be used to establish a baseline against which to 
measure progress. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Coordination of Spraying, Military, and Development 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5. (C)  Santos said three different program areas -- 
spraying, development aid, and military campaigns -- were 
planned separately, leading to  failure to consolidate 
initial successes.  Under the current approach, the FARC 
returned to areas after military operations subsided, and 
coca was resown where fumigation ended.  By aligning these 
three approaches, affected areas could be recovered 
permanently.  Wood agreed coordination was vital.  The 
difficulty, he said, was that spray and development projects 
could not shift locations from one day to the next.  For 
example, in 2005 we shifted spray operations to Narino at the 
GOC's request and lost the opportunity to spray 30,000 
hectares. Moreover, alternative development programs targeted 
places most likely to succeed.  Still, he said we wanted to 
support military efforts to hold terrain, and were looking at 
supporting small projects in Putumayo. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Helicopter Dilemma (Counterdrug / Counterguerrilla) 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶6. (C)  Pinzon said Putumayo showed the need for 
coordination, particularly with respect to helicopters. 
Spraying in Putumayo had been effective; no coca remained 
there.  The COLMIL had sent in a counterdrug battalion to 
control territory, create an environment conducive to 
development, and ensure coca would not be replanted.  Still, 
without helicopters, the battalion lacked the mobility to 
carry out its mission and establish permanent control.  The 
U.S. had sufficient helicopter assets; the question was to 
which mission they would be applied.  The Ambassador said we 
also believed flexibility was important, and we had approved 
41 of 44 GOC requests to make spray helicopters available for 
military operations.  Still, the fundamental problem was the 
shortage of helicopters.  Using helicopters for military 
missions translated into fewer hectares sprayed.  A/S 
Patterson said we would soon provide equipment for a fourth 
spray package, which would increase spray capacity.  The 
Colombians were enthusiastic over this news. 
 
--------------------- 
Wealth Tax Allocation 
--------------------- 
 
¶7. (C)  Pinzon noted that allocation of the new 'wealth tax' 
for military spending was nearly finalized; a detailed budget 
matrix would be shared soon.  Wood noted a tendency to spend 
new tax income on "things" and cautioned that those would not 
serve their purpose if they were not sustained.  Expenses 
such as training, airstrip upgrades, logistics systems, and 
personnel management must not be overlooked.  The U.S. was 
ready to help.  Santos affirmed that the COLMIL's intent was 
to "buy the minimum."  Colombian purchases would not be 
guided by actions in Venezuela or Ecuador.  Still, certain 
materiel required repair and refurbishment, such as the 
Navy's four frigates which played an important role in 
interdiction.  The MoD urged candidly, "I ask for your help 
in evaluating what we really need from my military's 
wish-list."  For the first time, he stressed, every COLMIL 
capital investment included a study of maintenance costs. 
 
------------------------------ 
Planning for 'Nationalization' 
------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (C)  A/S Patterson said the lack of pilots and mechanics, 
as well as budgets for sustainment, was a major obstacle to 
nationalizing our aviation assistance programs.  Pinzon said 
the COLMIL would begin on February 9 a planning exercise with 
the Embassy.  The exercise would review budgets for the next 
two to three years and would prioritize expenditures with a 
view to sustainment, maintenance, and logistical capacity. 
Patterson noted that she and Pinzon would meet on February 5 
in Washington to discuss nationalization programs.  Shannon 
added that it would be important to show that Colombia was 
preparing now for nationalization. 
 
--------------------------- 
Pending Visit to Washington 
 
--------------------------- 
 
¶9. (C)  Both sides looked forward to talks between Santos and 
U.S. Secretary of Defense Gates on February 1.  Santos 
commented on the "positive chemistry" he felt with new 
SouthCom Commander Admiral Stavridis.  He said the strategic 
framework agreement almost ready, and the COLMIL's 25-point 
strategy for the Consolidation of Democratic Security policy 
was evolving well.  On High Value Targets (HVTs), Santos said 
these were a means to an end not an end in themselves.  Both 
sides agreed that future planning documents should detail 
specific programs.  Ambassador Wood said the GOC's new 
"Strengthening Democracy and Social Development" plan should 
outline specific programs for which the GOC was seeking 
funding. This would facilitate Europena support. 
 
¶10.  (U) A/S Shannon and A/S Patterson did not have the 
opportunity to clear this cable before their departure. 
 
DRUCKER