
VZCZCXRO4023
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHKL #1446/01 2640915
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 210915Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0007
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RHHMUNA/USCINCPAC HONOLULU HI PRIORITY
CONFIDENTIAL SECTION 01 OF 03 KUALA LUMPUR 001446 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/21/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM KJUS MY
SUBJECT: VIDEO OF JUDGE FIXING ROCKS MALAYSIA'S JUDICIARY 
 
 
Classified By: Political Section Chief Mark D. Clark for 
reasons 1.4 (b and d). 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim rocked 
Malaysia's legal establishment on September 19 when he held a 
press conference to release an eight minute videotaped 
conversation purportedly showing a phone conversation between 
a famously corrupt Malaysian attorney and the current Chief 
Justice of Malaysia's Federal Court engaged in a judge fixing 
scheme.  The Malaysian Bar Association and opposition parties 
called for immediate inquiries into the allegations and for 
the establishment of a royal judicial commission to 
investigate the Chief Justice.  Malaysian political leaders, 
including current Deputy Prime Minister Najib Razak, 
downplayed the revelations in the press, calling into doubt 
the authenticity of the taped conversation.  Government 
controlled and influenced newspapers printed but downplayed 
the release of the tape, often burying the article to the 
lesser-read center pages, and avoided printing the names of 
the judges and political leaders discussed in the tape. 
There is speculation that Anwar released the tape at this 
time in an effort to strengthen his appeal in a recently 
dismissed defamation suit against former Prime Minister 
Mahathir.  It may also be true that the tape is intended to 
force the retirement of Chief Justice Ahmad Fairuz whose 
ordinary contract expires in October 2007.  End Summary. 
 
Anwar alleges Chief Justice involved in "judge fixing" 
------------------- ------------- ------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Malaysia's judiciary came under the spotlight again on 
September 19 after former DPM and de facto Peoples Justice 
Party (PKR) leader Anwar Ibrahim released an eight-minute 
video clip showing senior Malaysian lawyer VK Lingam in a 
mobile phone conversation allegedly with current Chief 
Justice Tun Ahmad Fairuz Sheikh Abdul Halim fixing the 
appointment of "friendly" senior judges.  The video 
supposedly filmed in 2002, was posted on the online news 
portal Malaysiakini and on PKR's party website.  At the time 
the tape was allegedly recorded, Ahmad Fairuz was the Chief 
Judge of Malaya, in charge of all High Court judges in 
Peninsular Malaysia.  Among the cases "discussed" by the 
chief justice and the senior lawyer were Anwar's appeals and 
the potential appointment of Ahmad Fairuz as the Chief 
Justice of the Federal Court-- an event which eventually took 
place in 2003 when he bypassed several other senior judges in 
line for the position.  At the September 19 press conference, 
Anwar claimed the revelations proved that his previous 
appeals against his sodomy and abuse of power convictions 
were tainted and that he was denied a proper and fair trial. 
 
Explosive Conversation 
----------------------  
¶3. (U) In the video clip, VK Lingam is heard telling a person 
alleged to be Fairuz that "key players" should be nominated 
for judicial appointments in order to hear cases and deliver 
judgments accordingly.  He exhorted Fairuz's loyalty and 
"sacrifices" and added that even former Chief Justice Tun 
Eusoff Chin had told him that Fairuz is "110% loyal."  Lingam 
stressed, "We want to make sure our friends are there for the 
sake of the (then) PM (Mahathir) and the sake of the country. 
 Not for our own interest, we want to make sure the country 
comes first." 
 
¶4. (U) Also implicated in the conversation were business 
tycoon and former PM Mahathir crony Vincent Tan and his 
business partner Tengku Adnan Tengku Mansor, then minister in 
the PM's Department, and currently the Tourism Minister. 
Based on Lingam's conversation, both Tan and Adnan had 
apparently played an instrumental role in the appointment of 
judges as well to secure the honorific title of 'Tan Sri' for 
Ahmad Fairuz.  Towards the end of the eight-minute video 
clip, Lingam acknowledged, "you (Fairuz) have suffered... so 
much you have done, for the election, Wee Choo Keong, 
everything. . .nobody would have done all this. . . God bless 
you and your family."  The reference to Wee Choo Keong seems 
to confirm that Lingam was talking to Chief Justice Fairuz as 
it was Fairuz who in 1995 as an election court judge upheld 
an election petition contesting DAP candidate Wee's victory 
as a Member of Parliament in Kuala Lumpur's Bukit Bintang 
district.  Instead of calling for fresh election, Fairuz made 
an unprecedented decision by dismissing Wee and naming the 
losing Barisan Nasional MCA candidate Dr. Lee Chong Meng the 
winner. 
 
VK Lingam "Judge Fixer Extraordinaire" 
-------------------------------------- 
 
KUALA LUMP 00001446  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) VK Lingam is a senior lawyer who came into the 
spotlight during former Chief Justice Tun Eusoff Chin's term 
(1994 - 2000) in office.  Dubbed locally as the "judge fixer 
extraordinaire," Lingam was a sought after lawyer as he had 
the ears of the then Chief Justice and his clients won all 
their cases.  Lingam's relationship with the former Chief 
Justice was so close that their families were known to go on 
joint holidays paid for by Lingam.  There were also 
allegations that Lingam wrote some of the judgments for his 
own cases.  In one example of a defamation case involving his 
client Vincent Tan against journalist the late MGG Pillai, it 
was alleged Lingam who wrote the judgment in his firm and 
dispatched the "floppy disc with the judgment" to the judge's 
chambers.  He was also implicated in the Perwaja Steel Mill 
fiasco (a failed development project during Mahathir's era) 
where government appointed auditors investigating the failure 
of the project found exorbitant fees paid to Lingam's firm 
"for unsubstantiated services."  However, Lingam's influence 
within the judiciary waned during the term of Chief Justice 
Dzaiddin (2000 - 2003) until Fairuz was named the Chief 
Justice in March 2003.  Lingam represented former PM Mahathir 
in a defamation suit filed by Anwar Ibrahim for calling him a 
homosexual at a press conference in 2005.  In July 2007, 
Judicial Commissioner Tengku Maimon Tuan Mat dismissed the 
suit without hearing the merits of the case and ruled that 
the suit was "obviously unsustainable" and "clearly an abuse 
of the court process."  The former DPM has filed an appeal 
against the decision. 
 
Reactions to the Expose 
----------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Former DPM Anwar stated that the revelations proved 
his appeals against his sodomy and abuse of power convictions 
"were tainted" and that he was denied a proper and fair 
trial.  He added that the "scandalous" expose, "serves to 
collaborate our allegations of a political conspiracy of the 
highest level and corruption of the highest judicial office, 
seriously bringing into question the impartiality of judicial 
proceedings, including mine."  Anwar, who was sacked as 
Deputy Prime Minister in 1998, spent six years in jail after 
he was convicted of sodomy and corruption charges.  Although 
his sodomy conviction was later overturned, the corruption 
verdict was upheld.  He added that the People's Justice Party 
will file a special appeal with the Conference of Rulers (a 
constitutionally formed council of Malaysia's nine sitting 
monarchs and four non-royal governors), to assume their 
"constitutional roles" and take appropriate action.  The 
party has also lodged a report with the Anti-Corruption 
Agency (ACA) and the Bar Council. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Responding to the expose, Bar Council President 
Ambiga Sreenevasan urged the government to establish a royal 
commission of inquiry to investigate the video and the 
judiciary.  She pointed out that rumors and allegations of 
such machinations have been rife and therefore, "With the 
emergence of this video clip, the concerns expressed by 
various quarters in relation to the judiciary can no longer 
be swept aside."  Echoing the Bar Council President's call, 
former UN Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and 
Lawyers Param Cumaraswamy (who helped represent Anwar Ibrahim 
in his defamation suit against Mahathir) told poloffs that 
only an independent commission of inquiry and "nothing less" 
will be able to clear the tainted image of the judiciary. 
However, he acknowledged that the UMNO centric government 
does not have the "political will to investigate the 
shenanigans in the judiciary." 
 
¶8. (U) Opposition leader Lim Kit Siang stated in a letter to 
PM Abdullah that Chief Justice Fairuz should be suspended 
citing constitutional provisions that allow the removal of a 
Federal Court judge for ethical breach.  He added that he had 
asked the Prime Minister to appoint an Acting Chief Justice 
and take "concerted efforts to restore public confidence in 
the independence, impartiality, professionalism, and 
integrity of the judiciary."  Human Rights NGOs have also 
called on the Chief Justice to resign and urged the 
government to conduct a judicial review of all politically 
connected cases including former DPM Anwar Ibrahim's cases, 
appointment of judges and the sacking of the former Chief 
Justice and two Supreme Court Judges in 1988. 
 
A Mooted Response from GOM and Local Media 
---------- ------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The GOM's response to the allegation has been 
extremely feeble.  Minister in the Prime Minister's 
Department Mohd Nazri Abdul Aziz, who handles the law 
portfolio, stated that anyone with evidence of wrongdoing 
involving the appointment of judges should forward it to the 
 
KUALA LUMP 00001446  003 OF 003 
 
 
proper authorities to investigate.  He added he would wait 
for the ACA to complete its investigations before making 
further comments.  Similarly, Attorney General Gani Patail 
opined, "No criminal offense appears to have been committed 
in the video recording" but added that he was getting further 
opinion on the matter and studying other information in the 
video clip.  Current Deputy Prime Minister Najib Razak 
commented to the press that the "Government will first 
confirm the authenticity of the video before deciding on the 
next course of action." 
 
¶10. (SBU) Interestingly the mainstream newspapers, all 
government controlled or heavily influenced, carried the 
story but downplayed the news by placing it far from the 
front page and by not naming the people mentioned in the 
clip.  Instead the printed press chose terms like "a 
prominent lawyer", a "very senior judge", "a number of 
prominent judges", "a prominent businessman and a politician, 
both of whom were close to the then Prime Minister". 
UMNO-owned, Malay language newspapers did not publish former 
DPM Anwar Ibrahim's press conference September 20 but instead 
carried pictures of the Chief Justice breaking fast with the 
King and the Prime Minister at an official function. 
However, in the September 21 edition although they still had 
pictures of the Chief Justice breaking fast with prominent 
UMNO politicians, the Malay papers carried a brief report on 
the issue, buried in the back pages of the paper.  Even "The 
Sun", an English language newspaper considered "more 
independent" than the other newspapers buried the news among 
other reports, seemingly because Vincent Tan, who is 
mentioned in Lingam's conversation with Fairuz, owns the 
paper.  Former High Court judge Visu Sinnadurai opined to 
poloffs that the poor response from the government and the 
press was because, "it was former DPM Anwar who released the 
video."  He told poloffs that the GOM will naturally maintain 
a distance when any issue involves the former DPM. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶11. (C) Malaysia's judiciary has suffered from allegations of 
corruption and political interference since the 
constitutional crisis of 1988 when the PM Mahathir fired the 
Chief Justice and several other judges and stripped from the 
constitution clauses guaranteeing the independence of the 
judiciary.  Anwar's allegations and video-taped evidence came 
as little surprise to the nation, but highlighted and 
reinforced long-held doubts concerning the lack of 
independence in Malaysia's judicial system.  The allegations 
of judge fixing involve several senior UMNO leaders and 
supporters, and it is highly doubtful the Government will 
find the political will to thoroughly and honestly 
investigate the veracity of the claims.  Set against the 
back-drop of Malaysia's pending elections, Anwar's release of 
the tape appears to have political, as well as personal, 
motivations.  Anwar's PKR party, and the opposition in 
general, have focused many of their recent campaigns on 
anti-corruption platforms, and this story adds another 
anti-corruption arrow in the opposition's campaign quiver. 
These accusations also give weight to Anwar's claims that he 
was unjustly convicted in 1998 and therefore should not be 
prevented from contesting a seat in parliament in the next 
election.  While such a contention will undoubtedly fail 
before the UMNO-controlled election commission, it reinforces 
Anwar's PR-influenced role as a victim of a corrupt system. 
 
¶12. (C) Given the story's limited billing and self-censorship 
among the mainstream press, it is likely the story will 
wither on the vine.  In general, only Fairuz's contract 
extension lies on the chopping block.  Fairuz has reached the 
mandatory retirement age for judges of 66, but it is common 
practice for the Chief Justice to receive an intial six-month 
extension possibly followed by subsequent extensions up to 
the age of 68.  It is commonly held among Malaysia's legal 
professionals that Fairuz was seeking his initial extension 
in October when his current contract was set to expire. 
Whether the axe will swing remains a question. 
KEITH