
VZCZCXRO1008
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHTRO
DE RUEHFR #1040/01 2120904
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 310904Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6888
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
CONFIDENTIAL SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 001040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/31/2019 
TAGS: PREL XY IV NG GV CM MR FR
SUBJECT: WEST AFRICA:  FRENCH MFA OFFICIAL'S JULY 30 
COMMENTS 
 
REF: PARIS 997 
 
Classified By: Kathleen Allegrone, Political Minister-Counselor, 1.4 (b 
/d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY:  MFA AF Deputy DAS-equivalent Laurent Bigot 
on July 30 commented on a range of West Africa issues: 
 
--  Cote d'Ivoire:  Bigot thought elections were still 
possible, if not likely, on November 29. 
 
--  Niger:  He feared that President Tandja's quest for a 
third term not only represented a naked bid for power but 
also demonstrated Tandja's belief that he is Niger's savior. 
 
--  Guinea:  Bigot said that Guinea seemed "hopeless" and 
described CNDD president Moussa Dadis Camara as "crazy but 
dangerously charismatic." 
 
--  Cameroon:  He thought that President Biya would continue 
to play a low-key, Cameroon-focused approach despite FM 
Kouchner's recent urging that he display more leadership. 
During Biya's recent visit to France, Sarkozy reportedly 
stressed the importance of "democratization." 
 
--  Mauritania:  The French are relieved that the elections 
have taken place free of major problems.  Bigot noted that 
France's shift in policy to be more accepting of Aziz was 
based on his prior demonstrated willingness to work with 
France on regional anti-terrorism.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Laurent Bigot provided an overview of several 
African issues on July 30.  (BIO NOTES:  Bigot is the deputy 
to MFA AF/W DAS-equivalent Christine Fages; Fages is the only 
MFA AF DAS-equivalent who has a deputy.  Bigot will replace 
Fages as AF/W DAS-equivalent on September 1, when Fages 
becomes the MFA's Deputy Spokesperson, which Bigot described 
as a highly challenging but prestigious position within the 
MFA.  He said that present spokesperson Eric Chevallier had 
recommended her about a month ago to FM Bernard Kouchner and 
that Kouchner had signaled his approval a few days ago. 
Fages would have become DAS-equivalent for AF/C had this not 
taken place.  Chevallier himself will soon leave to became 
Ambassador to Syria.  END BIO NOTES.) 
 
Cote d'Ivoire 
------------- 
¶3.  (C)  Bigot said that he shared AF A/S-equivalent Stephane 
Gompertz's relative optimism about the November 29 elections 
in Cote d'Ivoire (reftel).  The electoral process was moving 
forward, albeit less smoothly than one might like. 
Nonetheless, Bigot thought that there was nothing that now 
indicated that the November 29 goal could not be met.  He 
said that one big hurdle would be the publication of the 
electoral lists, scheduled to take place soon.  If the 
candidates all accept the lists, the Ivoirians will have 
overcome a major hurdle. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Bigot (please PROTECT for comments in this paragraph) indicated disapproval that President Sarkozy and 
FM Kouchner had recently publicly expressed skepticism about 
the November 29 elections and about President Gbagbo's 
integrity, which had led Ivoirians to engage in a war of 
words via the press.  Bigot thought that the Presidency's 
mistrust of Gbagbo stemmed from the fact that Bruno Joubert, 
Deputy Diplomatic Advisor and Senior Africa Advisor at the 
Presidency, had been MFA AF A/S-equivalent in November 2004, 
when the Bouake bombing incident occurred.  Bigot thought 
that that experience may have left Joubert with a permanent 
mistrust of Gbagbo, which he conveyed to Sarkozy and 
Kouchner.  Although Bigot expressed disapproval over the 
public statements Sarkozy and Kouchner had made, he conceded 
that the statements might goad Gbagbo into adhering to the 
elections timetable, "if only to prove our leaders wrong." 
He hoped that would be the case. 
 
Niger 
----- 
¶5.  (C)  Bigot said that the GOF remained firmly opposed to 
President Tandja's bid to remain in power, especially since 
his announcement followed shortly after Sarkozy's visit 
there, during which Sarkozy was convinced that Tandja would 
leave power as constitutionally mandated.  Bigot said that if 
Tandja succeeded in obtaining a third term, there would 
necessarily be a weakening of democracy in Niger, "which will 
only benefit AQIM and other Sahel terrorist elements."  Bigot 
thought that Tandja was motivated by the age-old reluctance 
of a dictator to cede power and by his apparent belief that 
is on some divine mission, that only he can fulfill, to serve 
as Niger's savior. 
 
 
PARIS 00001040  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶6.  (C)  Bigot also noted that family wealth was involved. 
Tandja's wife and one of their sons, Bigot reported, had 
their own private businesses that benefited from having 
Tandja in power.  The son had substantial dealings with China 
with respect to various natural resource concessions in Niger 
the Chinese had been accorded.  Tandja's remaining in power 
would help ensure that this financial pipeline did not dry up. 
 
Guinea 
------ 
¶7.  (C)  When Guinea was raised, Bigot's first reaction was 
to describe it as "hopeless."  He had been there earlier in 
the year accompanying Cooperation and Francophonie Secretary 
of State Joyandet shortly after President Conte's death and 
CNDD president Moussa Dadis Camara's seizure of power.  Bigot 
had also attended the recent International Contact Group 
meeting in Conakry.  He described the country as being in 
extremely desperate straits.  When asked about Dadis, Bigot's 
first reaction was to describe him as "crazy."  Bigot 
provided examples of his erratic behavior, including not 
falling asleep most nights until 5:00 or 6:00 am because of 
his fear of coups during the night and his waking up in the 
early afternoon, with no work getting done before 3:00 pm at 
the earliest.  What saved Dadis, Bigot believed, was his very 
charismatic nature and his ability to command attention as a 
speaker.  This, Bigot said, was a "dangerous quality" given 
Dadis's other characteristics. 
 
¶8.  (C)  Bigot said that Joyandet would soon revisit Guinea, 
in conjunction with a visit to Mauritania to attend President 
Aziz's inaugural ceremonies, and also to Niger.  In Guinea, 
Joyandet planned to deliver a stern message on the need to 
move forward on elections in 2009 or else face international 
condemnation.  Bigot was not optimistic about elections in 
Guinea in 2009. 
 
¶9.  (C)  Bigot closed by remarking that Dadis's statements 
about being in power only for a transitory period, his stated 
desire to put Guinea on the right path, and his stated 
intention to fight corruption, quite eerily evoked memories 
of very similar statements Conte made when he came to power, 
"and we all know what happened after that." 
 
Cameroon 
-------- 
¶10.  (C)  Bigot said that Cameroon President Biya's visit to 
France the previous week had gone well. Biya met with several 
ministers and business leaders.  At a January 23 dinner 
hosted by FM Kouchner, Kouchner urged Biya to play a more 
active leadership role in Africa, now that he was one of 
Africa's senior leaders, especially following Gabon President 
Bongo's passing.  At a January 24 lunch, Sarkozy reportedly 
stressed the importance of democratization in Cameroon as 
well as elsewhere. 
 
¶11.  (C)  Bigot said he was not sure that Biya would become 
more of an activist.  His style had long been low-key and 
focused on Cameroon and not bigger regional or international 
issues.  Biya was not an extrovert seeking the limelight; he 
preferred playing an "under the radar" role, Bigot believed. 
Bigot thought that while Biya's low-key style made him a bit 
invisible, it also served to protect him from the kind of 
scrutiny that high-profile public leaders (such as Bongo) 
often attract.  Thus journalists did not spend much time 
digging through his dirty linen and reporting on his personal 
and family finances as front-page news items as they had with 
Bongo and others.  Bigot suspected that Biya would continue 
to shun attention and go about his business quietly, as 
seemed to be his habit. 
 
Mauritania 
---------- 
¶12.  (C)  As had A/S-equivalent Gompertz (reftel), Bigot 
expressed relief that the elections had gone fairly smoothly 
in Mauritania.  The picture shifted drastically once Wade's 
accord was accepted, he noted.  "Once that disparate group 
came to agreement, we thought we were in the clear." 
 
¶13.  (C)  Bigot confided that the GOF, at both the MFA and 
Presidency, had initially been strongly anti-coup.  That 
changed over time, he said, as the French military and 
intelligence services stressed the need to avoid alienating 
Mauritania and to work with Aziz on counter-terrorism so long 
as he held power.  Bigot said that one key factor was that 
the French had worked closely with Aziz on PTER issues before 
the coup, and he had demonstrated a certain reliability and 
commitment.  Bigot said the French shift in policy that took 
place in December 2008, which resulted in a more tolerant 
position on Aziz's staying in power (provided that acceptable 
elections took place at some point), was based largely on his 
proven willingness to work with France on terrorism. 
 
PARIS 00001040  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
 
PEKALA