
VZCZCXRO4815
PP RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHTRO
DE RUEHFR #0997/01 2041544
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 231544Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6811
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHMFISS/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE PRIORITY
CONFIDENTIAL SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 000997 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2019 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV KDEM NG MA MR IV FR
SUBJECT: MFA AFRICA DIRECTOR'S JULY 21 DISCUSSION OF 
MADAGASCAR, MAURITANIA, NIGER, COTE D'IVOIRE 
 
Classified By: Kathleen Allegrone, Political Minister-Counselor, 1.4 (b 
/d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY:  MFA AF A/S-equivalent Stephane Gompertz on 
July 21 expressed frustration with the political impasse in 
Madagascar; relief that elections had transpired relatively 
well in Mauritania, offering a possible conclusion to the 
long political crisis there; exasperation with Niger 
President Tandja's efforts to retain power, about which 
President Sarkozy "is furious;" and, unlike most GOF 
officials, optimism that elections will take place in Cote 
d'Ivoire on November 29 as planned.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C)  PolMinCouns and acting AF-watcher met with MFA 
Africa Director (A/S) Stephane Gompertz for a review of 
current issues.  Discussion focused on Madagascar, 
Mauritania, Niger and Cote d'Ivoire.  We have reported 
separately by e-mail Gompertz's comments on Somalia. 
 
Madagascar 
---------- 
¶3.  (C)   Gompertz delivered his remarks on Madagascar with a 
clear tone of frustration that the political impasse and lack 
of consensus on a way forward to elections continued to 
prevail.  He said there was no apparent easy way to resolve 
the crisis.  Presidential Deputy Diplomatic Advisor Bruno 
Joubert had met on July 20 with newly appointed SADC mediator 
Joaquim Chissano.  Gompertz was disappointed that Chissano 
told the French that he would go slowly and take a deliberate 
approach.  In Gompertz's opinion, Chissano, as well as the 
Malgache generally, were not operating with a sense of 
urgency.  The GOF would welcome clear signs that all parties 
wanted to settle the crisis as soon as possible.  Instead, 
neither Chissano nor the other parties seemed in a hurry. 
Gompertz noted the weakening of Madagascar's economy and the 
deteriorating security climate. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Chissano apparently wanted the four principals 
(Ravalomanana, Rajoelina, Ratsiraka, and Zafy) to meet in 
Angola, which Ravalomanana and Ratsiraka were willing to do. 
Rajoelina, however refused.  Gompertz, who was preparing to 
go to Addis Ababa (with Presidential AF Advisor Remi 
Marechaux) for the July 22 Contact Group meeting, said that 
Rajoelina was "committing a grave error" by not being present 
in Addis Ababa himself, especially since Gompertz understood 
that Ravalomanana and Ratsiraka would either be present or 
would be well represented.  Rajoelina's refusal to go to 
Addis Ababa seemed to puzzle Gompertz, who noted Rajoelina's 
recent visit to Brussels.  Gompertz surmised that Rajoelina 
was receiving bad advice from, among others, Franco-Malgache 
businessman Patrick Leloup, "who is always pursuing his own 
business interests first." 
 
¶5.  (C)  Gompertz said that Rajoelina seemed to believe that 
he could force his way to elections on his own terms, much as 
Aziz had thought in Mauritania until he learned that a 
compromise solution was the best way forward.  Rajoelina had 
not come to that conclusion, despite French entreaties that 
he seek a broad-based consensus.  Could Chissano achieve what 
Wade had achieved in Mauritania? -- Gompertz said he was "not 
optimistic."  Ravalomanana was not helping either -- Gompertz 
repeated what French Presidency officials had told us earlier 
-- that Ravalomanana was recruiting mercenaries in France 
(and in South Africa) in an effort to create a para-military 
force that could help him seize power. 
 
¶6.  (C)  There were, however, encouraging signs.  SADC had 
moderated its position and was now more in line with the 
international community, having abandoned an earlier call for 
military action against Rajoelina in order to re-install 
Ravalomanana.  Gompertz lauded South African president Zuma's 
very positive role in shifting SADC's position.  When asked 
whether elections could take place in 2010, Gompertz stressed 
the need for an accord.  He said that it would be better if 
legislative elections preceded the presidential contest, if 
only to have a legislature in place rather than a 
post-presidential legislative election that a newly-installed 
president could manipulate.  An even better scenario would 
involve not having any of the principals (Ravalomanana, 
Rajoelina Ratsiraka, and Zafy) run, but Gompertz conceded 
that such a scenario was impossible. 
 
Mauritania 
---------- 
¶7.  (C)  In contrast, Gompertz was considerably more upbeat 
(and relieved) about Mauritania -- "so far so good" were his 
first words when asked.  He said that France became 
relatively comfortable as soon as the Wade-brokered deal took 
form.  He noted that France was at first very strongly 
anti-coup but then moderated its position because of the need 
to cooperate with Mauritania over regional anti-terrorism, a 
 
PARIS 00000997  002 OF 002 
 
 
policy shift that involved President Sarkozy.  Aziz seemed 
committed to cooperate with France on terrorism issues. 
Gompertz praised Wade ("we didn't think he could do it") and 
also AU Peace and Security Commissioner Lamamra for their 
roles in hammering out the accord.  Gompertz indicated he had 
no problem with the international community's taking its time 
before resuming normal treatment of Mauritania. 
 
¶8.  (C)  On regional terrorism and AQIM, Gompertz repeated 
that Aziz would be helpful.  The international community 
needed to help Mauritania as well as Mali and Niger. 
Gompertz descried Mali as the most serious problem, noting 
that a Malian military unit had recently been attacked and 
taken heavy casualties.  The Tuareg feared AQIM as well, but 
needed to be handled carefully.  Some Tuareg seemed willing 
to take a more active role in countering regional terrorism, 
but Gompertz cautioned that such a role would have to be 
carefully arranged, in order to avoid potential Tuareg-Arab 
conflict. 
 
Niger 
----- 
¶9.  (C)  Gompertz's mood soured when we asked about Niger 
President Tandja's quest for a third term.  His first 
response was to note that "Sarkozy is furious.  When he went 
there a few months ago, he came away thinking that Tandja 
would not seek a third term."  Gompertz said that "France 
cannot support a third term."  He recited Tandja's several 
unconstitutional and irregular acts -- dissolving the 
constitutional court, invoking Article 53 of the constitution 
to give himself extraordinary powers, and seeking a 
referendum that would validate his seeking a third term. 
Gompertz noted the serious harm Tandja had already done to 
Niger's democracy and its institutions; he did not rule out 
public unrest or even a coup.  Gompertz was aware of ECOWAS, 
UN, and AU efforts to pressure Tandja but he thought the only 
actor Tandja would respect was Nigeria.  However, he 
suspected that Nigeria would not take decisive action. 
 
¶10.  (C)  After the August 4 referendum, which Gompertz 
believed Tandja would win, the EU would have to examine the 
scheduled legislative elections.  They seemed to be flawed 
even at this stage -- the GON had already published a list of 
26 individuals who would be banned from seeking office. 
Asked why Tandja was behaving this way, Gompertz said he was 
receiving bad advice from his Minister of Security.  There 
was also the problem of a presumed successor's being 
imprisoned and Tandja's need to scramble until the succession 
issue is settled.  Gompertz also did not rule out the 
possibility that Tandja was following the path taken by 
innumerable dictators over the years -- he may perceive 
himself as the savior of his people, on some sort of divine 
mission. 
 
Cote d'Ivoire 
------------- 
¶11.  (C)  Gompertz, exuding a slight air of whimsy, said that 
he stood virtually alone within the GOF in believing that the 
November 29 elections in Cote d'Ivoire would take place as 
scheduled.  He admitted that colleagues considered him naive. 
 He stated, however, that there was progress on several 
fronts.  Voter registration seemed to be moving forward.  The 
government had restructured its financing (at a lower price) 
with French firm SAGEM for its information and communications 
management support.  SRSG Choi was "pessimistic" but Gompertz 
thought that President Gbagbo now believed he could win, and 
such a belief could allow the elections to take place as 
scheduled.  Gompertz observed that the security situation 
seemed to be improving as well. 
 
 
PEKALA