
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB
DE RUEHUNV #0289/01 1701559
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O 191559Z JUN 09
FM USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9682
INFO RUEHII/VIENNA IAEA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS IMMEDIATE 0172
RHEBAAA/DOE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
SECRET UNVIE VIENNA 000289 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
ISN/RA FOR NEPHEW AND DANIEL, IO/T FOR GOLDSTEIN, NEA FOR 
MONZ, DAMASCUS FOR POUNDS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2034 
TAGS: PREL PARM SY KN IAEA KNNP
SUBJECT: IAEA/SYRIA/BOARD OF GOVERNORS: CONCERN OVER NEW 
URANIUM FINDINGS, HEIGHTENED ATTACKS ON ISRAEL, ISRAEL 
VERSUS DG FIREWORKS 
 
REF: UNVIE 00266 
 
Classified By: DEPUTY CHIEF OF MISSION GEOFFREY PYATT FOR REASONS 1.4 ( 
B) AND (D) 
 
------------------- 
Summary and Comment 
------------------- 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The June Board debate on Syria unfolded along 
largely familiar lines with many Board members calling on 
Damascus to cooperate with the Agency,s requests, while NAM 
and Arab delegations continued to focus on Israel,s 
misdeeds, rather than the need for Syrian cooperation.  The 
debate did little to advance the issue, but was punctuated by 
a fiery exchange between Israel and Director General 
ElBaradei that detracted from our effort to improve Board 
dynamics. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The NAM &welcomed8 Syrian adherence to legal 
obligations under its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement 
(CSA) while ignoring or downplaying findings of anthropogenic 
(man-made) uranium.  By contrast, the new uranium findings at 
the Miniature Neutron Source Reactor (MNSR) concerned many 
like-minded countries.  The NAM/Arabs argued the MNSR 
findings were a matter for routine safeguards that should not 
be connected to the investigation to the Dair Alzour (also 
known as Al-Kibar) site.  Russia for the first time expressed 
concern about the uranium findings, noted they require 
explanation, and called for a dispassionate investigation. 
Taking its cues from the NAM, Syria focused on Israel and 
dismissed uranium findings at the MNSR, noting that the 
facility is for university experiments and is fully under 
safeguards; for the first time, Syrian Atomic Energy 
Commission head Othman explicitly denied Syrian cooperation 
with the DPRK in the nuclear field.  Iran also spoke in 
Syria,s defense under Rule 50, and again requested a General 
Conference agenda item on the destruction of the Dair Alzour 
facility (Note: A formal written request is required to 
submit an agenda item, so Iran's call alone has no practical 
effect. End Note.)   In all, 21 Statements were delivered 
under the Syria Verification Agenda Item, including on behalf 
of the European Union and the Non Aligned Movement (read by 
Egypt instead of current NAM Chair Cuba), representing 31 of 
35 Board members.  The only Board members not to speak on 
Syria were Brazil, China, Mexico, and Uruguay.  Six states 
spoke under Rule 50, the Republic of Korea, Israel, Libya, 
Indonesia, Iran, and Syria.  The Board remains deeply 
polarized on the Syrian case, even more so than on Iran.  For 
example, Saudi Arabia,s public silence on the Iran agenda 
item is in stark contrast to its defense of Syria.  Mexico,s 
potent statement on Iran also offers contrasts with its 
silence on Syria. 
¶3.  (SBU) The Director General,s appeal, at the end of the 
Iran agenda item (septel), for transparency and cooperation 
beyond the narrow purview of legal authorities, fell on deaf 
NAM and Syrian ears.  ElBaradei had called for implementation 
of the Additional Protocol (AP) and directly admonished Syria 
by saying that &if you want to prove allegations are not 
accurate, the best thing to do is to be transparent.8  This 
helpful intervention was subsequently overshadowed when 
Israel took the floor under the Syrian item to levy an 
impassioned admonition to both Syria and the Director 
General, whom it openly accused of political bias.  Israel 
also called upon the DG to take measures the IAEA had 
&refrained8 from taking, a thinly veiled reference to a 
Special Inspection.  The DG, at the conclusion of the Syria 
agenda item, excoriated Israel in turn for violating 
international law and &preaching8 at the IAEA while 
insulting the investigative process with its unresponsiveness 
and, noting that he had not shared certain correspondence 
received from Israel because he wanted to spare the Board 
such &gutter8 talk. 
 
¶4. (C) Comment:  Israel,s statement, which Israeli 
Ambassador Michaeli delivered under instructions (Michaeli 
shared with Mission his personal reservations about the tack 
Israel was taking) largely backfired and distracted from the 
focus on Syria's obligations and from the direct approach the 
DG had taken earlier to telling Iran it needed to start 
cooperating with the IAEA.  Even friendly Board members, 
while not endorsing ElBaradei,s views, believed the DG's 
response should have been expected and that Israel should 
have known better.  Many questioned whether we had counseled 
Israel against this course (which we had).  Mission will 
 
 
monitor closely whether this puerile exchange has any 
negative impact on the scope and pace at which ElBaradei is 
willing to let his staff press the investigation in Syria, 
specifically in regard to any possible consideration of the 
special inspection option.  End Summary and Comment. 
 
---------------------- 
Syria Should Cooperate 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The majority of Board members called for Syria to 
cooperate with the Agency as requested by the Director 
General in his latest report on implementation of Safeguards 
in Syria (GOV/2009/36, ref A). Among those focusing on Syrian 
cooperation were the EU, Canada, Russia (Syria should show 
cooperativeness), Australia, Turkey, New Zealand, Switzerland 
(Syria should cooperate totally with the IAEA), Japan, 
Argentina, India (called on &all concerned8 parties to 
cooperate), and Ghana.  Under Rule 50, the Republic of Korea 
requested Syria,s full cooperation and Indonesia said the 
Agency needs cooperation from all parties concerned.  The EU, 
Turkey, Argentina, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, ROK 
also joined the U.S. in requesting Syria provide the 
additional information, documentation, and access to Dair 
Alzour, other sites, and the debris as requested by the 
Agency.  The like-minded continued to highlight concerns. 
The EU expressed deep concern that the information provided 
by Syria does not adequately support its assertions about the 
nature of the Dair Alzour site and does not allow the Agency 
to determine the nature of the facility and complete its 
assessment.  Canada remained deeply concerned about 
revelations of undeclared nuclear activities in Syria and 
connections with DPRK, and recalled the Agency,s assessment 
that the features of the building were not inconsistent with 
a nuclear reactor.  Australia argued that until Syria 
cooperates, the Board cannot be sure of the nature of its 
nuclear program.  New Zealand regretted that the Agency can 
report no progress in the investigation since the previous 
meeting of the Board.  Japan regretted Syria,s partial 
responses to the Agency.  ROK also expressed concern about 
the inadequate information provided by Syria.  The EU, 
Australia, and Japan joined us in calling on Syria to sign 
and implement the Additional Protocol. 
 
¶6. (SBU) By contrast, NAM and Arab Board members &welcomed8 
ongoing Syrian cooperation to date and argued that 
cooperation should not exceed legal obligations under its 
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement (CSA).  The NAM statement 
read by Egypt rather than NAM Chair Cuba made this point 
while noting that information provided by Syria was still 
being assessed.  South Africa was also among those 
&commending8 and encouraging &continued8 cooperation by 
Syria.  Malaysia called for Syria to continue to show 
flexibility and transparency in cooperating with the Agency, 
but noted that Syria is &only obliged to comply within its 
comprehensive safeguards agreement,8 and &all other 
measures are purely voluntary.8  Egypt, in its national 
capacity, cautioned that the lines are becoming blurred 
between what is a legal obligation and what goes beyond, and 
that this line should be made clear.  Cuba rejected calls on 
Syria to go beyond its obligations, saying it sets a bad 
precedent.  Algeria and then Libya under Rule 50 encouraged 
Syria to cooperate with the Agency pursuant to its CSA 
obligations. Libya also &commended8 Syria for its 
cooperation to date.  Among the NAM, Ghana,s national 
statement was notable in encouraging Syrian cooperation and 
citing partial and unresponsive answers to the IAEA,s 
queries. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Uranium Findings at Two Syrian Sites 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) Other Board members, largely from among the 
like-minded, continued to seek clarification from Syria on 
the origin of the anthropogenic uranium found at Dair Alzour 
and expressed concern over new findings of anthropogenic 
uranium at the Miniature Neutron Source Reactor (MNSR) 
facility in Damascus.  The EU called into question the 
completeness and correctness of Syria,s declaration under 
its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement (CSA) given the 
findings of uranium of a type not in Syria,s declared 
inventory of nuclear material.  The EU and Canada recalled 
the Agency,s assessment that there was a low probability 
that the uranium particles were introduced by the missiles 
 
 
used to destroy the building.  Canada noted that the findings 
of uranium at both sites &further reinforce the immediate 
and essential need for Syria to cooperate fully and with 
transparency.8  Japan expressed disappointment that little 
progress had been made since March with respect to the 
uranium findings at Dair Alzour.  In addition to the usual 
like-minded concerns, Turkey said the uranium findings at the 
MNSR need to be better understood within the &totality of 
the dossier.8  Argentina sought &a precise comprehension 
with regards to the presence of uranium particles at the Dair 
Alzour site.8  The ROK also said the findings need to be 
understood. 
 
¶8. (SBU) NAM countries largely downplayed the uranium 
findings at Dair Alzour and the MNSR, either by ignoring the 
issue in their statements or by disassociating the MNSR 
samples from the Dair Alzour investigation.  Egypt, on behalf 
of the NAM, argued that the MNSR samples were part of routine 
safeguards implementation and not connected to the 
&alleged8 nuclear reactor at Dair Alzour.  Cuba maintained 
that there was an &exaggerated connotation8 to the uranium 
particles, which should be clarified as part of the Agency,s 
routine process, and dismissed speculation connecting uranium 
findings at Dair Alzour and the MNSR as groundless.  Fellow 
NAM troika member Malaysia only mentioned the uranium 
particles in the context of its call on Israel to cooperate 
with the Agency.  Alone among the NAM, Saudi Arabia obliquely 
referred to the uranium samples by noting that that the 
Agency will continue to deal with samples and information so 
the Syria issue could be brought to a conclusion. 
 
----------------- 
Russian Statement 
----------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Russia delivered a more balanced statement than in 
pervious Boards that for the first time expressed concern 
that the uranium findings still require an explanation and 
supported a dispassionate investigation by the IAEA. 
However, Russia was also careful to stipulate that the 
finding of uranium particles is not in itself proof that the 
destroyed facility had a nuclear purpose.  Russia both 
supported the Director General,s appeal for Syria to show 
cooperativeness and noted the DG,s request to Israel to 
share with the Agency the information that led to the use of 
force against the Syrian facility &without giving the Agency 
an opportunity to verify the facility before it was 
destroyed.8  Russia also sought an explanation of the 
serious delay (i.e. by the U.S.) in informing the IAEA after 
the fact. (Comment: Although Russia continues to express 
reservations about the Syrian dossier, it seems increasingly 
swayed by the factual evidence.  End Comment.)  China, which 
has spoken on Syria at the last two Boards, did not deliver 
an intervention. 
 
---------------------- 
NAM/Arabs Blame Israel 
---------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Further illustrating the polarized environment on 
this issue in the Board, NAM/Arab interventions focused 
almost entirely on Israel,s &aggression8 against Syria 
(sic) while giving credence to Syria,s explanation that the 
destroyed facility was a military installation.  The NAM 
statement, as well as individual NAM members (Malaysia, 
Egypt, Ecuador, Cuba, and Algeria, as well as Libya, 
Indonesia, Iran, and Syria under Rule 50) decried Israel,s 
unilateral use of force as a flagrant violation of the UN 
Charter.  All the Arab delegations and several NAM complained 
of double standards with respect to Israel.  Malaysia further 
observed that no other Member State besides the NAM has 
condemned Israel, which Cuba attributed to political 
motivations on the part of those turning a deaf ear to 
&Israeli aggression.8  Cuba added that the IAEA was the 
&victim8 as the destruction of the facility prevented 
verification.  Iran, under Rule 50, again proposed as it did 
in March, adding to the 2009 General Conference agenda an 
item on &Consequences of Israel,s military attacks on 
Member States to Global Security.8 (Note: Putting this on 
the IAEA GC agenda would be an admission that the site was 
indeed nuclear-related.  In any case, despite Iran,s 
bluster, the Secretariat has not received a written request, 
required for an agenda item. End Note.) In addition to Middle 
East NPT issues, Algeria also referenced progress on broader 
disarmament with respect to the CD, CTBT and FMCT in its 
 
 
statement. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Several NAM also focused on information sharing. 
Egypt further observed that the manner in which the 
information was brought to the IAEA is not acceptable and 
that it reflects a &deep lack of confidence of the IAEA by 
some member states.8  South Africa did not focus on 
Israel,s destruction of the facility but supported the DG,s 
call for Israeli cooperation as well as for expeditious 
sharing of information with the Agency.  Ghana and India 
associated themselves with the NAM statement, but did not in 
a national capacity repeat the criticism of Israel. India 
hoped &all8 concerned would respond to the DG,s request. 
 
------------------- 
Report Not Released 
------------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) The Syria report was not released due to lack of 
consensus.  Canada,s request that the report be made public, 
was seconded by the U.S., Australia and New Zealand.  Egypt 
objected to the release the Syria report, adding that calls 
to do so were politically motivated and in no way furthered 
the Agency,s technical mandate.  Cuba, India, and Saudi 
Arabia also spoke against the release of the report.  Iraq 
noted that nothing should be published unless authorized 
exclusively the Board.  (Note:  Later in the Board meeting 
(septel) the NAM put forward a position that the general 
policy of de-restricting Board documents should be predicated 
on the consent of the state concerned, i.e. giving states 
such as Syria effective veto power over releasing reports.) 
 
¶13. (SBU) The EU, New Zealand, Japan, and South Africa looked 
forward to the DG,s report on Syria at the September Board. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Syria Blames Israel, Downplays Uranium Finding 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶14. (SBU) Syrian Atomic Energy Chair Ibrahim Othman delivered 
the Syria statement as the last speaker under Rule 50. 
Othman began by thanking NAM states and friendly countries 
for their understanding and support for Syria,s position. 
He emphasized that Syria has consistently cooperated with the 
Agency and is still cooperating in all areas, &particularly 
in the issue at hand.8  Othman noted that on May 12, May 17, 
and May 24, 2009, Syria sent written letters providing 
replies to all Agency questions, even though the Director 
General,s report describes some replies as partial and 
repetitive.  However, Syria has clarified all replies in 
keeping with its obligations under its CSA. 
 
¶15. (SBU) In a Freudian slip, Othman affirmed that &Israel 
has attacked a Syrian nuclear facility,8 and added that 
Syria exercised restraint in order to avoid escalation in one 
of the most volatile regions in the world.  Othman complained 
that instead of appreciating Syria, the IAEA asked Syria to 
disclose information Syria did not have. He noted that the 
Agency inspectors have visually looked at facility at Dair 
Alzour, and verified it is a military facility, yet there are 
still questions on the nature of the facility.  Othman,s 
repeated that the facility was military and not related to 
nuclear activity.  (Comment: Othman,s response 
misrepresented the fact that the Agency is seeking the nature 
of the facility that was destroyed, not the current facility. 
End Comment.) 
 
¶16. (SBU) Othman stressed that Syria is in a state of war 
with Israel, calling Israel an aggressor and occupier of its 
territory.  He asked &How then are we asked to give info on 
our military installations?8  &Why does the international 
community not require Israel to produce a list of bombs it 
possesses?8  &Why did Israel not allow environmental 
sampling of warheads where they are stored to ensure there is 
no uranium there?8  He focused on Israel,s non-NPT status 
and called on Board members to condemn Israel,s actions 
before questioning Syria on issues related to national 
security.  Othman also noted Israel,s &surprising8 request 
to delete sentences referring to its destruction of the Dair 
Alzour facility in various reports. 
 
¶17. (SBU) Othman continued to dismiss IAEA findings of 
uranium particles.  He noted that the reporting of uranium 
found not being of a type included in Syria,s declared 
inventory of nuclear material &is grossly unfair and 
 
 
unjust8 towards Syria.  He explained that the Agency found 
just a few natural uranium particles that were chemically 
processed, and queried whether any state had ever been asked 
to include in its inventory contaminated material?  Analyses 
of environmental samples do not clarify the uranium came from 
a reactor, he noted adding that if the reactor was only a few 
months away from becoming operational then uranium particles 
should be everywhere.  Othman further asked if a reactor of 
&that kind8 does not need a whole list of material and 
equipment, and not just a water pump?  He claimed that Syria 
has answered all queries and inspectors have observed the 
pump feeding, as well as the location and the final 
destination of the water in the nearby villages.  Despite 
this, the IAEA still asked for more clarifications. 
 
¶18. (SBU) Othman objected to the DG report,s inclusion of 
the natural uranium finding in the hot cells at the MNSR 
facility and said the linkage to Dair Alzour is unjustified. 
He noted that hot cells are close to the neutron source 
(MNSR), which has been under the control and inspection of 
the IAEA; that the capacity of the MNSR is less than 30 
kilowatts-thermal, and that the neutron flow is extremely 
limited.  He added that the core is also sealed which means 
Syria cannot handle its fuel, and &cannot carry out any 
irradiation experiments in that core to obtain a high neutron 
flow.8  He further specified that the hot cells are made of 
lead and are 10 cm thick, and use tongs rather than 
manipulators.  Othman noted that all Syria can do in this 
reactor is a series of basic experiments for university 
students in nuclear activation analysis (NAA).  Syria is 
utilizing this reactor &well8 in such analysis, and that 
the reference materials, like most reference materials, 
contain uranium.  He explained that &concentrations were 
higher8 in 2008 than in previous years because Syria seldom 
used the hot cells until recently when a number of graduate 
students carried out NAA at the facility.  Othman said the 
Agency had been notified of this work. Othman noted that the 
Agency,s periodic inspection (the annual Physical Inventory 
Verification) will soon take place.  Syria will extend the 
Agency all the cooperation needed. 
 
¶19.  (SBU) Othman addressed the issue of North Korea for the 
first time at a Board meeting, noting that it was 
unacceptable to question linkages to the DPRK in allegations 
about Dair Alzour.  Syria is an independent country and it 
establishes its relations according to its national interests 
that should not be questioned.  Othman stressed that there 
are no activities by any Korean company in Syria in the 
nuclear field and that Syria has neither requested nor 
established any cooperation with any Korean company in the 
regard.  Also, Othman noted there is no scientific 
cooperation between Syrian and DPRK scientists. 
 
¶20. (SBU) Othman concluded that Syria has provided all 
information available and stressed that it will continue to 
cooperate with the Agency to close the file as soon as 
possible, although this would not be at the expense of 
Syria,s national security.  He closed by calling for 
establishment of a nuclear weapons free zone in the Middle 
East. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Israel Accuses DG of Bias on Syria 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶21. (SBU) As presaged in his short interventions under the 
Annual Report and SIR agenda items, Israeli Ambassador 
Michaeli delivered an emotional statement under the Syria 
agenda item objecting to references to Israel in the DG,s 
report and directly accusing the Director General of bias. 
After expressing appreciation for the Secretariat,s work, 
Israel,s statement began by deploring Syrian efforts to 
hamper the investigation, conceal the facts and cover up 
clandestine activities.  Israel also noted that cooperation 
by the DPRK was not explicitly called for in the report. 
Syria,s friends all but admitted the Dair Alzour was a 
nuclear site and Israel was confident all issues would be 
resolved once Syria met its obligation to cooperate and shed 
light on the origin of the anthropogenic uranium particles. 
Israel then chastised the Director General to take measures 
the IAEA had &refrained from taking8 to fully investigate 
the issues, a thinly veiled reference to a special 
inspection. 
 
¶22. (SBU) As in the statements on the Annual Report and SIR, 
 
 
Israel objected to references in paras 2 and 20 of the Syria 
report citing Israel as having destroyed the Dair Alzour 
facility, as ¬ in line with the professionalism8 of the 
Secretariat and deviating from past practice, in addition to 
having nothing to do with the investigation.  Michaeli added 
that Israel had responded in a timely manner and &in good 
faith8 to the Secretariat,s query on uranium munitions and 
saw the Director General,s repeated request on this issue as 
&redundant.8  If the Director General wanted further 
information from Israel, the statement questioned why he had 
refused to meet with Israeli officials (representatives of 
the Atomic Energy Commission) and called on the DG to 
&refrain from political bias8 and publically &lashing8 
Israel. 
 
¶23. (SBU) Israel,s public recrimination of the Director 
General, which we had had counseled against, provoked an 
equally acerbic response from ElBaradei.  Speaking at the 
conclusion of the Syria agenda item, the DG regretted the 
&distorted8 remarks from Israel and accused Israel of 
violating international law as it had done in the 1981 attack 
on the Osirak reactor, which had been condemned by the UN 
Security Council.   He took non-NPT member Israel to task for 
&preaching at8 the IAEA for not using all its tools, asking 
&Who are you to tell us what to do?8 ElBaradei blamed 
Israel for preventing the IAEA investigation in the first 
place and pledged to continue to refer to Israel,s bombing 
of the facility unless it could be attributed to &an act of 
God.8  He characterized Israel,s one line response to the 
IAEA,s first letter on uranium munitions as an &insult to 
the investigative process8 and further promised to continue 
asking about the types of armaments used in the attack. 
 
¶24. (C) On meeting with Israeli officials, ElBaradei affirmed 
that he would meet with Ambassador Michaeli any time but left 
it to his technical people to meet with their technical 
counterparts.  ElBaradei concluded by noting that Israel,s 
technical and political people had sent him &cheap8 letters 
that he threw in the waste basket rather than share with the 
Board, as he would not engage in a &gutter8 debate.  He 
also would not dignify the accusation of bias with a 
response.  (Comment:  Amb. Michaeli told MsnOff that in 
conversation the day before with the DG, Michaeli aired the 
complaint about not meeting with Israeli officials from the 
Israeli Atomic Energy Commission.  Referring to an earlier 
press story, Michaeli said that ElBaradei told him he could 
not meet with the IAEC because one of the concerned officials 
had called for the DG to be "fired.") 
 
¶25. (S//NF) Speaking privately with DCM after this exchange, 
ElBaradei complained that Michaeli had done nothing to 
preview this criticism of the DG in a 15 minute conversation 
the day before.  Mission counseled both sides not to pour 
fuel on the fire, but the Israeli Mission and then the IAEA 
Secretariat chose to release their statements to the press, 
which stirred the debate and could make it harder for Israel 
and IAEA to work together, including in important areas such 
as Israel's information sharing. 
 
---------------- 
Chair,s Summary 
--------------- 
 
¶26. (SBU) The Board Chair,s summary (posted on the GovAtom 
website) recorded the usual like-minded versus NAM points of 
view on the Syrian dossier.  For example, the summary recalls 
the Agency,s assessment of low probability of the uranium 
originating from munitions while in the next sentence noting 
that &some8 viewed Israeli responses as unconvincing.  It 
includes NAM references to Israeli use of force and notes 
that the Director General,s remarks would be included in the 
summary record. 
 
----------------------- 
U.S. Statement on Syria 
----------------------- 
 
¶27. (SBU) Below is the text of the U.S. Statement on Syria as 
delivered: 
 
Madame Chair, 
 
      Syria,s ongoing refusal to cooperate with the IAEA 
remains of serious concern to the United States and, indeed, 
should concern all supporters of the Agency,s safeguards 
 
 
system and the international nonproliferation regime.  As the 
Director General noted in his introductory statement, there 
are revived hopes for a new era of arms control.  Such an era 
would depend on an IAEA that can demonstrably meet the 
verifications challenges placed before it. 
 
      We thank the Director General for his latest report and 
applaud the Secretariat,s professionalism in pursuing the 
technical investigation in Syria.  We hope future reports 
will reflect a decision by Syria to change course and provide 
the Agency a full accounting of its nuclear program, 
especially any undeclared nuclear activities. 
 
      Over one year has passed since the IAEA began 
investigating Syria,s clandestine nuclear activities related 
to the destroyed reactor at Dair Alzour.  Regrettably, Syria 
has not used this time to resolve the lingering questions 
about the reactor and associated facilities.  Instead, it has 
chosen to hinder the Agency,s efforts by refusing to allow 
inspectors the access the Agency has deemed essential to 
perform its verification mission; by failing to provide 
information and supporting documentation about the destroyed 
facility at Dair Alzour; by failing to address the Agency,s 
questions about nuclear-related procurement efforts; and, of 
greatest concern, by taking steps to sanitize three 
additional suspected nuclear-related sites upon receiving the 
IAEA,s request for access.  As noted in the Director 
General,s latest report to the Board, the Agency has 
requested, since May 2008, to hold substantive discussions 
with Syria on these issues and has even offered to share all 
of its satellite imagery with Syria.  Unfortunately, Syria 
has thus far rebuffed the Agency,s offer. 
 
      Due to Syria,s non-cooperation, the Agency has yet to 
resolve the existing concerns and many unanswered questions 
related to the Dair Alzour facility.  Instead, the Agency,s 
list of questions is growing.  We note with concern that the 
Director General,s latest report reveals that new, 
additional traces of anthropogenic (or man-made) uranium 
particles have been detected at a second location, a reactor 
under IAEA safeguards, in Syria.  According to the report, 
routine environmental samples taken at the Miniature Neutron 
Source Reactor (MNSR) in Damascus revealed the presence of 
man-made natural uranium inside the hot cells.  As with the 
uranium previously detected at the Dair Alzour site, the 
uranium detected at the MNSR is &of a type not included in 
Syria,s declared inventory of nuclear material.8 
Unfortunately, Syria,s June 1 response to the Agency,s 
request for an explanation was no more forthcoming than 
Syria,s responses to other IAEA requests related to the 
investigation. 
 
      We call on Syria to cooperate fully with the Agency 
without delay to address all unresolved questions, including 
the presence of the undeclared man-made uranium detected at 
the Dair Alzour site and inside the hot cells at the MNSR. 
We must understand why such material ) material that was not 
previously declared to the IAEA ) was detected at two 
facilities in Syria, one of which was being constructed 
clandestinely. 
 
      Given the gravity of this issue and Syria,s refusal to 
allow the IAEA to complete its mandated verification 
activities, the United States urges all Board members to join 
us in demanding that Syria fully cooperate with the IAEA 
investigation without delay by granting the IAEA access to 
any information, debris and sites needed to complete its 
investigation.  In his latest report to the Board, the 
Director General says that &in order for the Agency to 
complete its assessment, Syria needs to be more cooperative 
and transparent.8  Such cooperation will go a long way in 
providing assurance to the international community of Syria's 
peaceful intentions. 
 
      The existence of undisclosed nuclear facilities in 
Syria and Syria,s refusal thus far to cooperate with the 
investigation further underline the limitations on the 
Agency,s ability to fulfill its mission in a country with a 
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement but without an Additional 
Protocol.  This kind of evasiveness led the international 
community to develop the Additional Protocol in order to give 
the inspectors the tools they need to provide us with the 
assurances we require that a country,s declaration is not 
only correct, but is also complete, and its nuclear program 
is therefore exclusively for peaceful purposes.  We call on 
 
 
Syria and all states that have not yet done so, to sign and 
implement the Additional Protocol. 
 
      Our goal with regard to Syria is transparency and the 
Board should show the way by making available to the public 
the Director General,s reports on the Implementation of the 
NPT Safeguards in the Syrian Arab Republic as the existence 
of undeclared nuclear activities is a matter of international 
concern.  We again urge Syria to provide without further 
delay whatever access and information the Agency deems 
necessary to resolve the outstanding questions. 
 
Thank you. 
SCHULTE